# POSIX

## What is POSIX?

POSIX stands for Portable Operating System Interface. It’s a family of standards specified by IEEE for maintaining compatibility among operating systems. Therefore, **any software that conforms to POSIX standards should be compatible with other operating systems that adhere to the POSIX standards**.

For that reason, most of the tools we use on Linux and Unix-like operating systems behave almost the same. For example, if we use the *ps* command, it should behave the same under OpenBSD, Debian, and macOS.

## POSIX Versions

The family of standards that POSIX refers to is known as IEEE Std 1003.*n-yyyy*. The *n* can be replaced with the version number such as IEEE Std 1003.1. We can also refer to the IEEE Std 1003.1 as POSIX.1. **The current version of POSIX.1 is [IEEE Std 1003.1-2017](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/nframe.html).**

POSIX 1003.1 is the base standard upon which the POSIX family of standards has been developed, and there are currently more than 20 standards and drafts under the POSIX umbrella.

POSIX.1 defines application portability, as well as the C interface and the behavior of system services for fundamental tasks such as process creation and termination, process environment manipulation, file and directory access, and simple I/O.

On the other hand, POSIX.2 describes the command interpreter, portable shell programming, user environment, and related utilities. Both standards are strongly influenced by existing UNIX practice and experience.

## The C API

POSIX defines its standards in terms of the C language. Therefore, **programs are portable to other operating systems at the source code level**. Nonetheless, we can also implement it in any standardized language.

The POSIX C API adds more functions on top of the ANSI C Standard for a number of aspects:

- File operations
- Processes, threads, shared memory, and scheduling parameters
- Networking
- Memory management
- Regular expressions

The complete description of the functions is defined in the POSIX [headers](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/nframe.html).

## General Concepts

In addition to the C API, POSIX also added rules for writing programs, like safety for the initialization of pointer types and concurrent executions. It also enforces rules for memory synchronization, such as restricting memory modification when it’s already in use. Apart from that, it also states security mechanisms for directory protection and file access.



## References

[A Guide to POSIX | Baeldung on Linux](https://www.baeldung.com/linux/posix)

[standard - What exactly is POSIX? - Unix &amp; Linux Stack Exchange](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/11983/what-exactly-is-posix/220877#220877)

[The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 7, 2018 edition](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/)


