# Operating System

An **Operating System** (OS) is an interface between a computer user and computer hardware. An operating system is a software which performs all the basic tasks like file management, memory management, process management, handling input and output, and controlling peripheral devices such as disk drives and printers.

> Hardware(CPU, Memory, Hard Drive) -> OS(Windows, Apple OS X, Linux) -> Linux

An operating system is software that enables applications to interact with a computer's hardware. The software that contains the core components of the operating system is called the **kernel**.

The primary purposes of an **Operating System** are to enable applications (spftwares) to interact with a computer's hardware and to manage a system's hardware and software resources.

Some popular Operating Systems include Linux Operating System, Windows Operating System, VMS, OS/400, AIX, z/OS, etc. Today, Operating systems is found almost in every device like mobile phones, personal computers, mainframe computers, automobiles, TV, Toys etc.

## History of OS

- Operating systems were first developed in the late 1950s to manage tape storage
- The General Motors Research Lab implemented the first OS in the early 1950s for their IBM 701
- In the mid-1960s, operating systems started to use disks
- In the late 1960s, the first version of the Unix OS was developed
- The first OS built by Microsoft was DOS. It was built in 1981 by purchasing the 86-DOS software from a Seattle company
- The present-day popular OS Windows first came to existence in 1985 when a GUI was created and paired with MS-DOS.

## Type of OS

- Batch Operating System
  
  Some computer processes are very lengthy and time-consuming. To speed the same process, a job with a similar type of needs are batched together and run as a group.
  
  The user of a batch operating system never directly interacts with the computer. In this type of OS, every user prepares his or her job on an offline device like a punch card and submit it to the computer operator.
- Multitasking/Time Sharing OS
  
  Time-sharing operating system enables people located at a different terminal(shell) to use a single computer system at the same time. The processor time (CPU) which is shared among multiple users is termed as time sharing.
- Real Time OS
  
  A real time operating system time interval to process and respond to inputs is very small. Examples: Military Software Systems, Space Software Systems are the Real time OS example.
- Distributed OS
  
  Distributed systems use many processors located in different machines to provide very fast computation to its users.
- Network OS
  
  Network Operating System runs on a server. It provides the capability to serve to manage data, user, groups, security, application, and other networking functions.
- Mobile OS
  
  Mobile operating systems are those OS which is especially that are designed to power smartphones, tablets, and wearables devices.



## Functions of Operating System

1. **Process management**: Process management helps OS to create and delete processes. It also provides mechanisms for synchronization and communication among processes.

2. **Memory management:** Memory management module performs the task of allocation and de-allocation of memory space to programs in need of this resources.

3. **File management**: It manages all the file-related activities such as organization storage, retrieval, naming, sharing, and protection of files.

4. **Device Management**: Device management keeps tracks of all devices. This module also responsible for this task is known as the I/O controller. It also performs the task of allocation and de-allocation of the devices.

5. **I/O System Management:** One of the main objects of any OS is to hide the peculiarities of that hardware devices from the user.

6. **Secondary-Storage Management**: Systems have several levels of storage which includes primary storage, secondary storage, and cache storage. Instructions and data must be stored in primary storage or cache so that a running program can reference it.

7. **Security**: Security module protects the [data and information](https://www.guru99.com/difference-information-data.html%20) of a computer system against malware threat and authorized access.

8. **Command interpretation**: This module is interpreting commands given by the and acting system resources to process that commands.

9. **Networking:** A distributed system is a group of processors which do not share memory, hardware devices, or a clock. The processors communicate with one another through the network.

10. **Job accounting**: Keeping track of time & resource used by various job and users.

11. **Communication management**: Coordination and assignment of compilers, interpreters, and another software resource of the various users of the computer systems.

---

## What is Kernel in OS?

The kernel is the central component of a computer operating systems. The only job performed by the kernel is to the manage the communication between the software and the hardware. A Kernel is at the nucleus of a computer. It makes the communication between the hardware and software possible. While the Kernel is the innermost part of an operating system, a shell is the outermost one.

## Features of Kernel

- Low-level scheduling of processes
- Inter-process communication
- Process synchronization
- Context switching

## Types of Kernel

There are many types of kernels that exists, but among them, the two most popular kernels are:

#### 1. Monolithic

A monolithic kernel is a single code or block of the program. It provides all the required services offered by the operating system. It is a simplistic design which creates a distinct communication layer between the hardware and software.

#### 2. Microkernels

Microkernel manages all system resources. In this type of kernel, services are implemented in different address space. The user services are stored in user address space, and kernel services are stored under kernel address space. So, it helps to reduce the size of both the kernel and operating system.

---

## Difference between Firmware and Operating System

Below are the Key Differences between Firmware and Operating System:

| Firmware                                                                                                                           | Operating System                                                                                          |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Define Firmware: Firmware is one kind of programming that is embedded on a chip in the device which controls that specific device. | Define Operating System: OS provides functionality over and above that which is provided by the firmware. |
| Firmware is programs that been encoded by the manufacture of the IC or something and cannot be changed.                            | OS is a program that can be installed by the user and can be changed.                                     |
| It is stored on non-volatile memory.                                                                                               | OS is stored on the hard drive.                                                                           |

## Difference between 32-Bit and 64-Bit Operating System

| Parameters                | 32. Bit                                                                          | 64. Bit                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| Architecture and Software | Allow 32 bit of data processing simultaneously                                   | Allow 64 bit of data processing simultaneously         |
| Compatibility             | 32-bit applications require 32-bit OS and CPUs.                                  | 64-bit applications require a 64-bit OS and CPU.       |
| Systems Available         | All versions of Windows 8, Windows 7, Windows Vista, and Windows XP, Linux, etc. | Windows XP Professional, Vista, 7, Mac OS X and Linux. |
| Memory Limits             | 32-bit systems are limited to 3.2 GB of RAM.                                     | 64-bit systems allow a maximum 17 Billion GB of RAM.   |


